.TH TXLC 1 "5 July 2012"
.DA 5 Jul 2012
.SH NAME
txlc \- 
TXL Programming Language Compiler (Version 10.6)
.SH SYNOPSIS
.na
.B txlc 
[ 
.IR txloptions
]
.IR txlfile
.ad
.SH DESCRIPTION
The
.IR `txlc'
command provides a convenient interface for compiling a TXL program to a standalone 
executable which can be distributed and executed independently of TXL.  
The single command argument 
.IR `program.Txl' 
is the TXL program to be compiled.  
The TXL program file must be named ending in the suffix 
.IR `.Txl' and must be either in the current working directory, 
in the 
.IR ./Txl 
subdirectory of the current directory, 
or in the system TXL library (e.g., 
.IR /usr/local/lib/txl
or
.IR C:/windows/txl
).
.PP
.IR txlc 
uses the TXL compiler/interpreter (see 
.IR txl (1)
) to compile the program to a TXL virtual machine byte code file, 
and then runs the TXL byte code converter to produce a C program that 
is compiled and linked with the TXL virtual machine to produce the output
file 
.IR filename.x
or 
.IR filename.exe, 
a standalone executable program.
.IR txlc
requires that the command line C compiler and linker
(normally 
.IR cc (1) 
or 
.IR gcc (1)
on Unix and Linux systems, 
.IR xlc (1)
on AIX, and the 
.IR MS Visual C++ 6.0 
command line tools on Windows) are installed and available in the current command line environment. 
.PP
All TXL information and error messages from the compile are sent to the terminal via the standard error stream (
.IR /dev/stderr
or
.IR CONERR$
).
.SH OPTIONS
Command line options of the 
.IR txlc
command are identical to those for
.IR txl (1).
.SH FILES
.nf
filename.Txl			input TXL program to be compiled (txlfile)
filename.CTxl			intermediate TXL virtual machine byte code 
filename_TXL.c			intermediate C code 
filename.x			output executable program
./Txl				user TXL program library
/usr/local/lib/txl		system TXL program library
.fi
.SH BUGS
Bugs should be reported using the support page on the TXL website, http://www.txl.ca .
.SH "SEE ALSO"
.IR txl (1),
``The TXL Programming Language, version 10.6'',
``User's Guide to the TXL Compiler/Interpreter, version 10.6''.
.SH AUTHORS
Version 10.6 of TXL was designed and implemented by J.R. Cordy
at Queen's University, Legasys Corp. and TXL Software Research Inc. 
between 1994 and 2012.
.PP
TXL was originally designed by J.R. Cordy and C.D. Halpern-Hamu
at the University of Toronto in 1985, and was originally implemented by
J.R. Cordy, E.M. Promislow and I.H. Carmichael at Queen's University 
between 1986 and 1988.  Version 7 was completely redesigned 
and implemented by J.R. Cordy and A. Malton at Queen's University in 1992,
and Version 10 was redesigned from the ground up by J.R. Cordy in 2001.
.SH COPYRIGHT
Copyright 2012 Queen's University at Kingston and James R. Cordy.
