.TH TXLP 1 "5 July 2012"
.DA 5 Jul 2012
.SH NAME
txlp \- 
TXL Programming Language Profiler (Version 10.6)
.SH SYNOPSIS
.na
.B txlp 
[ 
.IR profoptions
]
[ 
.IR txloptions
]
.IR inputfile
[
.IR txlfile
]
[
.IR "- useroptions"
]
.ad
.br
.na
.B txlp 
.IR profoptions
.ad
.SH DESCRIPTION
The
.IR `txlp'
command provides a convenient interface for profiling the grammar and transformation 
rules of a TXL program for a given input.
The command line format is identical to the
.IR txl
command - see 
.IR txl (1)
for details.
.IR `txlp'
compiles, loads and executes the the TXL program using a special profiling version 
of the TXL interpreter, and outputs the result profile to the terminal on the standard 
error stream.  
By default, a profile of the rule set is output, sorted by cumulative 
time spent executing each rule and its subrules.  
Using the  
.IR -parse 
command line option, a profile of the grammar in parsing the input is output instead.  
Options allow sorting of the profile output by time, space, number of search cycles, 
or parse efficiency.
.PP
When run with profiling options only (e.g., 
.IR txlp -space
), 
.IR txlp  
re-interprets the results of the previous 
.IR txlp 
run as indicated by the new profiling options.  
This is done by re-reading the raw profile data stored in the files 
.IR `txl.pprofout' 
and 
.IR `txl.rprofout' 
which are created by 
.IR txlp 
when it is first run.
.SH OPTIONS
The following profiling options are recognized by the
.IR txlp
command.
Other command line options are as described for the
.IR txl (1)
command.
.TP 10
\fI\-parse\fR            
Output a grammar parsing profile rather than the default rule transformation profile.
.TP 10
\fI\-time\fR          
Sort the profile by the most cumulative time per rule or nonterminal (default).
.TP 10
\fI\-space\fR          
Sort the profile by the most cumulative space used per rule or nonterminal.
.TP 10
\fI\-calls\fR          
Sort the profile by the most invocations per rule or nonterminal.
.TP 10
\fI\-cycles\fR          
Sort the profile by the most search/match cycles per rule or most parse cycles per nonterminal.
.TP 10
\fI\-eff\fR          
Sort the profile by the least parse efficiency per nonterminal.
Must be used with
.IR -parse.
.TP 10
\fI\-percall\fR            
Show average time, space and cycles per rule invocation or nonterminal call.
.SH FILES
.nf
inputfile			the input to be transformed
txlfile				the TXL program to transform it
txl.pprofout			parser profile raw data file
txl.rprofout			transformer profile raw data file
./Txl				user TXL program library
/usr/local/lib/txl		system TXL program library
/usr/local/lib/txl/txlpf.x	TXL profile generator
/usr/local/lib/txl/txlapr.x	TXL profile analyzer
.fi
.SH BUGS
Bugs should be reported using the support page on the TXL website, http://www.txl.ca .
.SH "SEE ALSO"
.IR txl (1),
``The TXL Programming Language, version 10.6'',
``User's Guide to the TXL Compiler/Interpreter, version 10.6''.
.SH AUTHORS
Version 10.6 of TXL was designed and implemented by J.R. Cordy
at Queen's University, Legasys Corp. and TXL Software Research Inc. 
between 1994 and 2012.
.PP
TXL was originally designed by J.R. Cordy and C.D. Halpern-Hamu
at the University of Toronto in 1985, and was originally implemented by
J.R. Cordy, E.M. Promislow and I.H. Carmichael at Queen's University 
between 1986 and 1988.  Version 7 was completely redesigned 
and implemented by J.R. Cordy and A. Malton at Queen's University in 1992,
and Version 10 was redesigned from the ground up by J.R. Cordy in 2001.
.SH COPYRIGHT
Copyright 2012 Queen's University at Kingston and James R. Cordy.
